---
title: What's a french prepa?
layout: article
description: Description of the french prepa system
---

The 'classes préparatoires aux grandes écoles' (CPGE), commonly called 'classes
prépas' or 'prépas', are a two-year curriculum extensible to three-years,
acting as a prep course with the main goal of training undergraduate students
for enrollment in one of the grandes écoles. The grandes écoles of France are
higher education establishments aside the mainstream framework of the public
universities. They include sciences & engineering schools, business schools,
specific humanities schools, but include neither medical institutes, nor
architecture institutes nor law institutes. They are generally focused on a
single subject area, such as engineering or business, have a moderate size, and
are often quite selective in their admission of students. Due to their
competitive entrance exams, they are widely regarded as a prestigious
curriculum by students, and traditionally have produced most of France's
scientists and executives.

In a given year, 800,000 people are born in France, 480,000 pass the
baccalaureat (secondary school diploma), and 37,000 of them are admitted in
CPGE.  Among those 74,000 undergraduate students, 47,000 of them follow prep
courses for entrance exams into sciences & engineering schools, 16,000 of them
for entrance exams into business schools, 11,000 of them for entrance exams
into humanities schools.

To get into one of the French grandes écoles, most students will take a very
competitive national exam at the end of the two-year program in one of the
CPGE. This national exam includes written tests during several weeks that will
challenge the students on what they have learned for the past two years.

Then, most of these students will be ranked accordingly to their results but
each year a certain percentage of students do not make this ranking.

These failing students will generally be allowed to repeat their second year or
will continue their studies in one of the local universities.

The successful students from across the country all go to places of examination
(usually, but not exclusively, in the capital, Paris) during the summer to
participate to a last round of selection. This process consists of oral exams,
usually 1h in duration, during which they are given a problem to solve.
Generally, after 20 min of preparation, they will expose their solution to a
teacher which will then challenge the candidate on their results and the
assumptions being made, as well, depending of the cases, to challenge on the
fly the candidate on questions not asked explicitly in the subject, especially
if the person finishes the problem earlier.

At the end of this stressful selection process, candidates will receive their
final ranking which will allow them - if ranked - to finally apply to the
grande école of their choice. The national exam is not an exam which applies
for exhaustively all the grandes écoles. In order to candidate for all the
grandes écoles, one must generally candidate to a large number (around 5) of
different examinations (Centrale, CCP, Polytechnique, e3a, mines), leading to a
month-long of different written exams and a month-long different oral exams,
possibly and likely in different places. The ranking at the end is specific to
a group of schools, admission in a prestigious examination like Polytechnique
does not automatically allow one to enter a lower-ranked school if one did not
pass the group of exams that this school belongs to. Their national ranking
will allow them or not to get into the grande école of their choice.

Admission
---------

Admission to the CPGE is usually based on performance during the last two years
of high school, called première and terminale. The CPGE are located within high
schools due to historical reasons (Napoleon created them at first as fourth to
sixth year of high school). but pertain to tertiary education, which means that
each student must have passed successfully their Baccalauréat (or equivalent)
to be admitted in CPGE. Each CPGE receives the files of hundreds of applicants
worldwide every year during April and May, and selects its new students under
its own criteria (mostly excellency). A few CPGE programmes, mainly the private
CPGEs (which account for 10% of CPGEs), also have an interview process or look
at a student's involvement in the community.

Organization of CPGE
--------------------

CPGE exist in three different fields of study: Science and Engineering,
Business, and Humanities. All CPGE programs have a nominal duration of two
years, but the second year is sometimes repeated once.

Scientific CPGE
===============

The oldest CPGEs are the scientific ones, which can only be accessed by
scientific Bacheliers. The different tracks are the following : * MPSI
(“mathematics, physics, and engineering science”) in the first year, followed
either MP (“mathematics and physics”) or PSI (“physics and engineering
science”) * PCSI (“physics, chemistry, and engineering science”), followed PC
(“physics and chemistry”) or PSI (“physics and engineering science”) * BCPST1
(“biology, chemistery, physics and earth sciences”) followed by BCPST2 * PTSI
(“physics, technology, and engineering science”), followed by PT (“physics and
technology”) The classes which especially train students for admission to the
elite École Normale Supérieure or École Polytechnique have an asterisk added to
their name, e.g. MP\*, and usually called “MP étoile” (“MP star”). Both the
first and second year programmes include as much as sixteen hours of
mathematics teaching per week, ten hours of physics, two hours of philosophy,
two to four hours of (one or two) foreign languages teaching and two to three
hours of minor options: either SI, engineering industrial science, chemistry or
theoretical computer science (including some programming using the Pascal or
CaML programming languages, as a practical work). With this is added several
hours of homework, which can rise as much as the official hours of class.

In scientific CPGE, the first year of CPGE is usually called the 'math sup' -
or hypotaupe - (sup for “classe de mathématiques supérieures”, superior in
French, meaning post-high school), and second year 'math spé' - or taupe -
(spés for “classe de mathématiques spéciales”, special in French). The students
of these classes are called taupins.

Life in a CPGE
--------------

The amount of work required of the students is exceptionally high. In addition
to class time and homework, students spend several hours each week completing
exams and 'colles' (very often written 'khôlles' to look like a Greek word,
this way of writing being initially a khâgneux joke). The so called 'colles'
are unique to French academic education in CPGEs. They consist of oral
examinations twice a week, in math, physics, chemistry, French and the foreign
languages, usually English and Spanish. Students, usually in groups of three,
spend an hour facing a professor alone in a room, answering questions and
solving problems. In CPGE littéraires (humanities), the system of 'colles' is a
bit different. They are taken every quarter in every subject. Students have one
hour to prepare a short presentation that takes the form of a French-style
dissertation (a methodologically codified essay, typically structured in 3
parts: thesis, counter-thesis, and synthesis) in history, philosophy, etc. on a
given topic, and that of a commentaire composé (a methodologically codified
commentary) in literature and foreign languages; as for the Ancient Greek or
Latin, they involve a translation and a commentary. The student then has 20
minutes to present his work to the teacher, who ends the session by asking some
questions on the presentation and on the corresponding topic. 'Colles' are
regarded as extremely stressful, particularly due to the high standards
expected by the teachers, and the subsequent harshness that may be directed at
students who do not perform adequately. But they are important as they prepare
the students, from the very first year, to the oral part of the competitive
examination, reserved to the happy few who successfully pass the written part.

When a student repeats his second year, he gets then the status of cinq demi
(“five halves”), for he was only a trois demi (“three halves”) during his first
second year, and un demi (“one half”) in his first year. The explanation behind
those names is that the most coveted engineering school is the Ecole
Polytechnique, nicknamed the X (as the mathematical unknown). In French, a
student is said to integrate a school when they are allowed to enroll in it. A
student is called a 3/2 if he integrates the Ecole Polytechnique between his
first and second year of preparatory class since the integral of x from 1 to 2
is 3/2. The same idea is valid for “cinq demi”, since the integral of x from 2
to 3 is 5/2. Students in their first year are also called “bizhuts”, and in
their second year, “carrés” (“squares”). Students enrolled in their second
second-year are also called “cubes” (or Khûbes), and a few turn to “bicarrés”
for a third and final second-year. These terms probably stem from repeated
attempts at applying to “X” (Polytechnique), yielding x2 and x3. Some ambitious
professors encourage their top students to eschew admittance to other
prestigious schools in order to try their hand at X one more time… Despite this
high standard, the 47 000 students in scientific CPGE must face the fact that
they won't all go to the Ecole Polytechnique. The renowned engineering schools
are Centrale Paris, Supélec, École nationale supérieure des mines de Paris,
École nationale des ponts et chaussées, École nationale de la statistique et de
l'administration économique, École nationale supérieure de techniques avancées,
École nationale supérieure des télécommunications, École supérieure de physique
et de chimie industrielles de la ville de Paris, Institut Supérieur de
l'Aéronautique et de l'Espace, École nationale de l'aviation civile or École
nationale supérieure d'arts et métiers, are also a proud goal to obtain for
these students.

The students of CPGE are usually matriculated concurrently in universities, and
can rejoin college in case of failure of their grandes écoles ambitions or if
they just do not wish to become engineers and feel not able to pass the Écoles
Normales Supérieures competitive examinations. The ratio of students who failed
to enter grandes écoles is low in the scientific and economics CPGE, but high
in humanities, for the only grande école aimed at in these classes is the École
Normale Supérieure.
